[cmake] Refuse too new or development LLVM versions by default (#1805)
AdaptiveCpp/AdaptiveCpp: CMakeLists.txt

      message(SEND_ERROR "CLANG_INCLUDE_PATH ${CLANG_INCLUDE_PATH} does not exist. Please provide clang's internal include path manually: Find the directory where __clang_cuda_runtime_wrapper.h is. Provide this directory for older ROCm versions and the parent directory for newer ones.")
    endif()
    if(WITH_ROCM_BACKEND)
      # Check if we're building against ROCm LLVM. This code checks if
      # CLANG_EXECUTABLE_PATH is located within ROCM_PATH.
      # Note: This might fail in ROCm distributions where ROCm is strongly decomposed
      # (spack?) but it is more reliable than just parsing the output of clang++ --version.
      # This is then later used to decide whether we need to make exemptions
      # from LLVM version compatibility checks.

>       file(GLOB_RECURSE ROCM_FOUND_FILES FOLLOW_SYMLINKS "${ROCM_PATH}/*")
>       if ("${CLANG_EXECUTABLE_PATH}" IN_LIST ROCM_FOUND_FILES)

Reviewer: Do you have a case in mind where traversing the full tree is more robust than

```suggestion
      file(REAL_PATH "${CLANG_EXECUTABLE_PATH}" CLANG_REAL_PATH)
      file(REAL_PATH "${ROCM_PATH}" ROCM_REAL_PATH)
      cmake_path(IS_PREFIX ROCM_REAL_PATH "${CLANG_REAL_PATH}" NORMALIZE CLANG_IS_IN_ROCM_PATH)
```

? I'm worried that enumerating all the files in the tree is going to make some network filesystems very unhappy.

Author: My understanding is that `cmake_path` is available from cmake 3.20, but the current minimum cmake version for AdaptiveCpp is set to 3.10. Not sure if we want to bump the minimum cmake version because of this?

I can follow your concern. I think we could be more conservative with the paths that we test. Realistically, we would e.g. never expect to find `clang` in the `include` subdirectory (which I imagine might be responsible for a large chunk of the many small files that might be challenging for network filesystems). So perhaps it's enough to query `bin`, `llvm/bin` and `lib/llvm/bin` subdirectories?

Such an approach will probably work for the majority of ROCm installations (especially AMD-packaged ones). The case I'm most concerned about though is ROCm installations where ROCm is split up (spack?), or there is no specific ROCm subdirectory because it's just installed into `/usr`...I suppose in that case, users could always use `-DACPP_EXPERIMENTAL_LLVM=ON`..

Author: I've updated the PR to now only scan common `bin` directories (`$ROCM_PATH/bin`, `$ROCM_PATH/llvm/bin`, `$ROCM_PATH/lib/llvm/bin`)

      set(WITH_ACCELERATED_CPU false)
    endif()
  endif()

> 

Reviewer: Right above (can't comment on unmodified code) we disable some things for LLVM < 15. Since the same limitation applies to ROCm LLVM, should we expand the code to handle USE_ROCM_LLVM there too?

Author: I'm not sure what you're suggesting. For the ROCm LLVM/Gromacs use case, we would be in a minimal compiler configuration (i.e. we wouldn't have SSCP, accelerated CPU etc enabled), so therefore this check shouldn't matter?

Or are you suggesting that we also prevent LLVM < 15 for ROCm LLVM with minimal compiler configurations?

Reviewer: > we would be in a minimal compiler configuration (i.e. we wouldn't have SSCP, accelerated CPU etc enabled), so therefore this check shouldn't matter?

We will be if the user sets it. If not, I get a barrage of conflicting error messages:

```
$ cmake ../.. -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=/opt/rocm/llvm/bin/clang -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=/opt/rocm/llvm/bin/clang++ -DLLVM_DIR=/opt/rocm/lib/llvm/lib/cmake/llvm 
...
CMake Error at CMakeLists.txt:466 (message):
  This LLVM seems to be a development version; only LLVM releases are tested
  and supported.  Use -DACPP_EXPERIMENTAL_LLVM=ON if you still wish to try
  your luck.

-- Using clang include directory: /opt/rocm/lib/llvm/lib/clang/19/include/..
-- Looking for C++ include filesystem
-- Looking for C++ include filesystem - found
-- Performing Test CXX_FILESYSTEM_NO_LINK_NEEDED
-- Performing Test CXX_FILESYSTEM_NO_LINK_NEEDED - Success
CMake Error at src/compiler/llvm-to-backend/CMakeLists.txt:43 (message):
  LLVM at /opt/rocm/lib/llvm/lib/cmake/llvm does not have libLLVM.so.  Please
  disable SSCP and related backends (-DWITH_SSCP_COMPILER=OFF
  -DWITH_OPENCL_BACKEND=OFF -DWITH_LEVEL_ZERO_BACKEND=OFF) or choose another
  LLVM installation
Call Stack (most recent call first):
  src/compiler/llvm-to-backend/CMakeLists.txt:146 (create_llvm_based_library)
```

If I apply flags recommended in the last one (which is the actual error), the compatibility error does not go away:

```
$ cmake ../.. -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=/opt/rocm/llvm/bin/clang -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=/opt/rocm/llvm/bin/clang++ -DLLVM_DIR=/opt/rocm/lib/llvm/lib/cmake/llvm -DWITH_SSCP_COMPILER=OFF -DWITH_OPENCL_BACKEND=OFF -DWITH_LEVEL_ZERO_BACKEND=OFF   

...

CMake Error at CMakeLists.txt:466 (message):
  This LLVM seems to be a development version; only LLVM releases are tested
  and supported.  Use -DACPP_EXPERIMENTAL_LLVM=ON if you still wish to try
  your luck.
```

I pushed a fix to our docs to recommend `-DACPP_COMPILER_FEATURE_PROFILE=minimal`, but then it, in turn, raises warning with ACpp < 24.06, so not a perfect solution either.

IMO, as long as we're detecting ROCm Clang anyway, I was suggesting to also default to `minimal` profile (or a subset of it; e.g., I think stdpar can still work in SMCP mode, right?) in this case.

Author: > IMO, as long as we're detecting ROCm Clang anyway, I was suggesting to also default to minimal profile (or a subset of it; e.g., I think stdpar can still work in SMCP mode, right?) in this case.

Not sure how easy this... There is a danger of circular dependencies here (ROCm detection is there to  rule out problematic cases for non-minimal profile, but we need to have the ROCm detection to know what to default to).

stdpar works in SMCP, but not in minimal profile because it needs to do fancy compiler trickery to make all allocations GPU-accessible.

FWIW, `WITH_SSCP_COMPILER` and friends are all deprecated, and users should migrate to `ACPP_COMPILER_FEATURE_PROFILE` anyway. Although I think they should still work, so I'll look into what causes these issues.

Author: @al42and I believe the issue was that we've also been checking for an undocumented variable `WITH_REFLECTION_BUILTINS` which also needed to be disabled to achieve parity with minimal feature profile. I've added a commit that treats `WITH_REFLECTION_BUILTINS` as something that is internally enabled whenever we enabled SSCP/stdpar/CBS, so that the user doesn't need to worry about it anymore.

For me, the following now works: `cmake -DLLVM_DIR=/opt/rocm/llvm/lib/cmake/llvm/ -DWITH_SSCP_COMPILER=OFF -DWITH_STDPAR_COMPILER=OFF -DWITH_ACCELERATED_CPU=OFF ..`

Note that all of SSCP, accelerated CPU/CBS and stdpar need to be disabled to achieve something that matches minimal profile.

Does this address your suggestion?

Reviewer: > FWIW, WITH_SSCP_COMPILER and friends are all deprecated,

Yeah, but we still support 23.10 (because that's what LUMI until very recently), and having to deal with two different installation manuals is a bit of a pain, so I try to check that the old behavior still works.

> Does this address your suggestion?

Yes, thanks. Tested (with `develop` merged into this branch) on a couple systems with ROCm Clang, and locally with mainline LLVM, all is well. :+1:
